@h1 BookReview: The God Delusion 
@div.bib by Richard Dawkins, Mariner Books, January 16, 2008, 978-0618918249
 Dawkins religiously steps through every "credible" argument for a
god. He debunks the gap theory, irreducible complexity, and a variety
of others.  What I found interesting about this book is that I haven't
thought about these arguments much on my own, because they rely on the
god axiom: which Dawkins explains in detail.

 As an atheist I don't think about the god axiom much.  I also don't
assume that the made up god(s) in my culture is any different from the
gods of other cultures.  Familiarity neither breeds contempt nor
truth.  Most religions take their gods as right, unequivocially.  I
think this simple fact (awareness of the myriad religions/gods) is
what convincrd me that the supernatural can't be true.  If you talk to
a Nepalese, he'll tell you Buddha is *obviously* god (or really, not a
god, but never mind). 

 What I enjoyed about this book is that Dawkins truly reasons
about the supernatural in this book.  The elegance and his usual
eloquence are what makes this book a great read.

 There are fair number of quotes.  The book is fairly long (464
pages in paper technology and 7206 locations on the Amazon Kindle).
Also, Dawkins has done his research (as usual), and found some
incredible pithy quotes from Einstein, Wittgenstein, Voltaire, etc.

 It's a great read up until the end.  If you are an agnostic, you
need to read this book.  I think anybody needs to read this book.
However, it's unlikely to inform anybody with strong beliefs about the
existence of the supernatural.  It'll be many, many more centuries
before we turn the tide on the supernatural, I believe.  Just like it
took 500 years to pardon Galileo Galilei.

@blockquote
[k975] The religious views of the Founding Fathers are of great
interest to propagandists of today's American right, anxious to push
their version of history. Contrary to their view, the fact that the
United States was not founded as a Christian nation was early stated
in the terms of a treaty with Tripoli, drafted in 1796 under George
Washington and signed by John Adams in 1797: As the Government of the
United States of America is not, in any sense, founded on the
Christian religion; as it has in itself no character of enmity against
the laws, religion, or tranquillity, of Musselmen; and as the said
States never have entered into any war or act of hostility against any
Mehomitan nation, it is declared by the parties that no pretext
arising from religious opinions shall ever produce an interruption of
the harmony existing between the two countries.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k1021] 'If it ends in a belief that there is no God, you will find
incitements to virtue in the comfort and pleasantness you feel in this
exercise, and the love of others which it will procure you.'  I find
the following advice of Jefferson, again in his letter to Peter Carr,
moving: Shake off all the fears of servile prejudices, under which
weak minds are servilely crouched. Fix reason firmly in her seat, and
call on her tribunal for every fact, every opinion. Question with
boldness even the existence of a God; because, if there be one, he
must more approve of the homage of reason than that of blindfolded
fear.  Remarks of Jefferson's such as 'Christianity is the most
perverted system that ever shone on man' are compatible with deism but
also with atheism. So is James Madison's robust anti-clericalism:
'During almost fifteen centuries has the legal establishment of
Christianity been on trial. What has been its fruits? More or less, in
all places, pride and indolence in the clergy; ignorance and servility
in the laity; in both, superstition, bigotry and persecution.' The
same could be said of Benjamin Franklin's 'Lighthouses are more useful
than churches.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k1211] I have found it an amusing strategy, when asked whether I am
an atheist, to point out that the questioner is also an atheist when
considering Zeus, Apollo, Amon Ra, Mithras, Baal, Thor, Wotan, the
Golden Calf and the Flying Spaghetti Monster. I just go one god
further.
@/blockquote

 I think that we can and do talk about art scientifically these
days just like we think we understand what causes people to believe in
out of body experiences.  Functional mafnetic resonance is an
eztremely powerful technique to analyze why the brain acts particular
ways.  Consider that we can today clearly distinguish (for the
majority of cases) between speaking to a god and mental illness.  In
the past all mental illness was considered the work of a malovent
spirtual being (e.g. a devil).

@blockquote
[k1236] [Steven Jay] Gould carried the art of bending over backwards
to positively supine lengths in one of his less admired books, Rocks
of Ages. There he coined the acronym NOMA for the phrase
'non-overlapping magisteria': The net, or magisterium, of science
covers the empirical realm: what is the universe made of (fact) and
why does it work this way (theory). The magisterium of religion
extends over questions of ultimate meaning and moral value. These two
magisteria do not overlap, nor do they encompass all inquiry
(consider, for example, the magisterium of art and the meaning of
beauty).  To cite the old clichés, science gets the age of rocks, and
religion the rock of ages; science studies how the heavens go,
religion how to go to heaven.  This sounds terrific -- right up until
you give it a moment's thought. What are these ultimate questions in
whose presence religion is an honoured guest and science must
respectfully slink away?
@/blockquote

 Truth be told, I was afraid to highlight this section, for I
didn't want to offend people.  "Throw them a sop" seems so harsh until
you compare it to most opininion columns, especially about sports and
even more oddly about their "own" team.  Another interesting question
is why do theologists (even from extreme places like Iran) leave so
many decisions about how the world works (such as the mystery of
converting mass into energy) to science and only take over when
science cannot explain something yet.  Theists are also quick to
invoke scientist who support their theories, and never not mention the
scientifically validated points of people who question the theories.

@blockquote
[k1265] I suspect that both astronomers were, yet again, bending over
backwards to be polite: theologians have nothing worthwhile to say
about anything else; let's throw them a sop and let them worry away at
a couple of questions that nobody can answer and maybe never
will. Unlike my astronomer friends, I don't think we should even throw
them a sop.  I have yet to see any good reason to suppose that
theology (as opposed to biblical history, literature, etc.)  is a
subject at all.
@/blockquote

 I have never heard a reasonable answer from theologists or laymen
to the following question(s). It seems so obvious a question to me
that there should be no, for example, Christian broadcasts on Saturday
(or Sunday?).  For a more clear example we should have people held to
their own religious standards and killed for adultry or for working on
their sabbath (whichever day it might be).

@blockquote
[k1269] Similarly, we can all agree that science's entitlement to
advise us on moral values is problematic, to say the least. But does
Gould really want to cede to religion the right to tell us what is
good and what is bad? The fact that it has nothing else to contribute
to human wisdom is no reason to hand religion a free licence to tell
us what to do. Which religion, anyway? The one in which we happen to
have been brought up? To which chapter, then, of which book of the
Bible should we turn -- for they are far from unanimous and some of
them are odious by any reasonable standards. How many literalists have
read enough of the Bible to know that the death penalty is prescribed
for adultery, for gathering sticks on the sabbath and for cheeking
your parents? If we reject Deuteronomy and Leviticus (as all
enlightened moderns do), by what criteria do we then decide which of
religion's moral values to accept? Or should we pick
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k1310] NOMA [Non-Overlapping Magisteria] is popular only because
there is no evidence to favour the God Hypothesis. The moment there
was the smallest suggestion of any evidence in favour of religious
belief, religious apologists would lose no time in throwing NOMA out
of the window.
@/blockquote

 The following discusses a study by the Templeton Foundation.
Dawkins discusses it at length in the text preceding the following
quote.

@blockquote
[k1372] The results, reported in the American Heart Journal of April
2006, were clear-cut. There was no difference between those patients
who were prayed for and those who were not. What a surprise. There was
a difference between those who knew they had been prayed for and those
who did not know one way or the other; but it went in the wrong
direction. Those who knew they had been the beneficiaries of prayer
suffered significantly more complications than those who did not.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k1381] It will be no surprise that this study was opposed by
theologians, perhaps anxious about its capacity to bring ridicule upon
religion. The Oxford theologian Richard Swinburne, writing after the
study failed, objected to it on the grounds that God answers prayers
only if they are offered up for good reasons. Praying for somebody
rather than somebody else, simply because of the fall of the dice in
the design of a double-blind experiment, does not constitute a good
reason. God would see through it.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k1385] But in other parts of his paper Swinburne himself is beyond
satire. Not for the first time, he seeks to justify suffering in a
world run by God: My suffering provides me with the opportunity to
show courage and patience. It provides you with the opportunity to
show sympathy and to help alleviate my suffering. And it provides
society with the opportunity to choose whether or not to invest a lot
of money in trying to find a cure for this or that particular kind of
suffering...Although a good God regrets our suffering, his greatest
concern is surely that each of us shall show patience, sympathy and
generosity and, thereby, form a holy character. Some people badly need
to be ill for their own sake, and some people badly need to be ill to
provide important choices for others. Only in that way can some people
be encouraged to make serious choices about the sort of person they
are to be. For other people, illness is not so valuable.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2017] Russell's (I almost said immortal) reply. Mightn't God respect
Russell for his courageous scepticism (let alone for the courageous
pacifism that landed him in prison in the First World War) far more
than he would respect Pascal for his cowardly bet-hedging? And, while
we cannot know which way God would jump, we don't need to know in
order to refute Pascal's Wager.  We are talking about a bet, remember,
and Pascal wasn't claiming that his wager enjoyed anything but very
long odds. Would you bet on God's valuing dishonestly faked belief (or
even honest belief) over honest scepticism?
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2133] After Darwin, we all should feel, deep in our bones,
suspicious of the very idea of design. The illusion of design is a
trap that has caught us before, and Darwin should have immunized us by
raising our consciousness. Would that he had succeeded with all of us.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2310] We have a cautionary tale here, and it is telling us this: do
not just declare things to be irreducibly complex; the chances are
that you haven't looked carefully enough at the details, or thought
carefully enough about them. On the other hand, we on the science side
must not be too dogmatically confident.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2345] There is, then, an unfortunate hook-up between science's
methodological need to seek out areas of ignorance in order to target
research, and ID's need to seek out areas of ignorance in order to
claim victory by default. It is precisely the fact that ID has no
evidence of its own, but thrives like a weed in gaps left by
scientific knowledge, that sits uneasily with science's need to
identify and proclaim the very same gaps as a prelude to researching
them.
@/blockquote

 I find it interesting that Dawkins invokes the concept of a
"zealous Popperian" when the book is very much evidence-based, and
doesn't allow for non-evidence-based discussions, other than his
opinion, of course.  While agree with (and very much enjoy) Dawkins's
views and writing, he is as absolute the supernatural as Popper was
about the concept of objective knowledge.

@blockquote
[k2365] When challenged by a zealous Popperian to say how evolution
could ever be falsified, J. B. S. Haldane famously growled: 'Fossil
rabbits in the Precambrian.' No such anachronistic fossils have ever
been authentically found, despite discredited creationist legends of
human skulls in the Coal Measures and human footprints interspersed
with dinosaurs'.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2445] St Augustine said it quite openly: 'There is another form of
temptation, even more fraught with danger. This is the disease of
curiosity. It is this which drives us to try and discover the secrets
of nature, those secrets which are beyond our understanding, which can
avail us nothing and which man should not wish to learn' (quoted in
Freeman 2002).
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2445] Another of [Michael] Behe's favourite alleged examples of
'irreducible complexity' is the immune system. Let Judge Jones himself
take up the story: In fact, on cross-examination, Professor Behe was
questioned concerning his 1996 claim that science would never find an
evolutionary explanation for the immune system. He was presented with
fifty-eight peer-reviewed publications, nine books, and several
immunology textbook chapters about the evolution of the immune system;
however, he simply insisted that this was still not sufficient
evidence of evolution, and that it was not 'good enough.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k2501] Earth's situation in the solar system is propitious in other
ways that singled it out for the evolution of life. The massive
gravitational vacuum cleaner of Jupiter is well placed to intercept
asteroids that might otherwise threaten us with lethal
collision. Earth's single relatively large moon serves to stabilize
our axis of rotation,68 and helps to foster life in various other
ways.
@/blockquote

 Asking the right question is one of the ways I think about
software - even down to the lowest levels of code.  Without the right
question you can find yourself lost in a maze of useless code.

@blockquote
[k3065] When we ask about the survival value of anything, we may be
asking the wrong question. We need to rewrite the question in a more
helpful way.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k3227] Dennett has offered a helpful three-way classification of the
'stances' that we adopt in trying to understand and hence predict the
behaviour of entities such as animals, machines or each other.82 They
are the physical stance, the design stance and the intentional
stance. The physical stance always works in principle, because
everything ultimately obeys the laws of physics. But working things
out using the physical stance can be very slow. By the time we have
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k3232] For an object that really is designed, like a washing machine
or a crossbow, the design stance is an economical short cut.  We can
guess how the object will behave by going over the head of physics and
appealing directly to design.
@/blockquote

 Again, the following section on our thought processes and how
they might have evolved was quite interesting to me with respect to
programming.  If we have a bias to intentionality, it would explain
why debugging software (or anything else) is so difficult.  It's been
my experience that our "intuition" is to apply a reason for almost
everything we see.  When debugging, this reason, hunch, whatever, is
almost certainly always wrong.  I need to go back to first principles
to understand what the observations are telling me, and build up a
evidence-based theory of operation.  For example, at bivio, we often
talk about the "physics" of the Web (or really Web browsers).  To
understand this physics is quite hard, because it has evolved over
many software years (and perhaps is the most widely programmed
protocol).  As with natural evolution, many of the standards on the
Web make no sense at all, and imho, ignore the physics of software in
general.  This is why I think debugging is so hard.  It requires us to
take the physics stance when it is most difficult: understanding the
unintentional effect of a faulty design.

@blockquote
[k3242] The intentional stance is another short cut, and it goes one
better than the design stance. An entity is assumed not merely to be
designed for a purpose but to be, or contain, an agent with intentions
that guide its actions. When you see a tiger, you had better not delay
your prediction of its probable behaviour.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k3382] Martin Luther was well aware that reason was religion's
arch-enemy, and he frequently warned of its dangers: 'Reason is the
greatest enemy that faith has; it never comes to the aid of spiritual
things, but more frequently than not struggles against the divine
Word, treating with contempt all that emanates from God.'85 Again:
'Whoever wants to be a Christian should tear the eyes out of his
reason.' And again: 'Reason should be destroyed in all Christians.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k3942] As Einstein said, 'If people are good only because they fear
punishment, and hope for reward, then we are a sorry lot indeed.'
Michael Shermer, in The Science of Good and Evil, calls it a debate
stopper. If you agree that, in the absence of God, you would 'commit
robbery, rape, and murder', you reveal yourself as an immoral person,
'and we would be well advised to steer a wide course around you'. If,
on the other hand, you admit that you would continue to be a good
person even when not under divine surveillance, you have fatally
undermined your claim that God is necessary for us to be good.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k4102] In 2005, the fine city of New Orleans was catastrophically
flooded in the aftermath of a hurricane, Katrina. The Reverend Pat
Robertson, one of America's best-known televangelists and a former
presidential candidate, was reported as blaming the hurricane on a
lesbian comedian who happened to live in New Orleans.* You'd think an
omnipotent God would adopt a slightly more targeted approach to
zapping sinners: a judicious heart attack, perhaps, rather than the
wholesale destruction of an entire city just because it happened to be
the domicile of one lesbian comedian.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k4290] As the Nobel Prize-winning American physicist Steven Weinberg
said, 'Religion is an insult to human dignity. With or without it,
you'd have good people doing good things and evil people doing evil
things. But for good people to do evil things, it takes religion.'
Blaise Pascal (he of the wager) said something similar: 'Men never do
evil so completely and cheerfully as when they do it from religious
conviction.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k4880] The saddest example I know is that of the American geologist
Kurt Wise, who now directs the Center for Origins Research at Bryan
College, Dayton, Tennessee. It is no accident that Bryan College is
named after William Jennings Bryan, prosecutor of the science teacher
John Scopes in the Dayton 'Monkey Trial' of 1925. Wise could have
fulfilled his boyhood ambition to become a professor of geology at a
real university, a university whose motto might have been 'Think
critically' rather than the oxymoronic one displayed on the Bryan
website: 'Think critically and biblically'.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k4889] [Kurt Wise] was too intelligent not to recognize the head-on
collision between his religion and his science, and the conflict in
his mind made him increasingly uneasy. One day, he could bear the
strain no more, and he clinched the matter with a pair of scissors.
He took a bible and went right through it, literally cutting out every
verse that would have to go if the scientific world-view were true. At
the end of this ruthlessly honest and labour-intensive exercise, there
was so little left of his bible that, try as I might, and even with
the benefit of intact margins throughout the pages of Scripture, I
found it impossible to pick up the Bible without it being rent in
two. I had to make a decision between evolution and Scripture. Either
the Scripture was true and evolution was wrong or evolution was true
and I must toss out the Bible...It was there that night that I
accepted the Word of God and rejected all that would ever counter it,
including evolution. With that, in great sorrow, I tossed into the
fire all my dreams and hopes in science.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k4912] I am hostile to religion because of what it did to Kurt
Wise. And if it did that to a Harvard-educated geologist, just think
what it can do to others less gifted and less well armed.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5129] [Norman St John Stevas], in turn, got [the Beethoven Fallacy]
from Maurice Baring (1874--1945), a noted Roman Catholic convert and
close associate of those Catholic stalwarts G. K.  Chesterton and
Hilaire Belloc. He cast it in the form of a hypothetical dialogue
between two doctors.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
'About the terminating of pregnancy, I want your opinion. The father
was syphilitic, the mother tuberculous. Of the four children born, the
first was blind, the second died, the third was deaf and dumb, the
fourth was also tuberculous.  What would you have done?'

@blockquote
'I would have terminated the pregnancy.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
'Then you would have murdered Beethoven.'
@/blockquote
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5144] For invented [the Beethoven Fallacy] certainly was. It is
completely false.  The truth is that Ludwig van Beethoven was neither
the ninth child nor the fifth child of his parents. He was the eldest
-- strictly the number two, but his elder sibling died in infancy, as
was common in those days, and was not, so far as is known, blind or
deaf or dumb or mentally retarded. There is no evidence that either of
his parents had syphilis, although it is true that his mother
eventually died of tuberculosis. There was a lot of it about at the
time.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5150] Peter and Jean Medawar had no need to doubt the truth of the
story in order to point out the fallacy of the argument: 'The
reasoning behind this odious little argument is breathtakingly
fallacious, for unless it is being suggested that there is some causal
connection between having a tubercular mother and a syphilitic father
and giving birth to a musical genius the world is no more likely to be
deprived of a Beethoven by abortion than by chaste abstinence from
intercourse.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5235] Our Western politicians avoid mentioning the R word
(religion), and instead characterize their battle as a war against
'terror', as though terror were a kind of spirit or force, with a will
and a mind of its own. Or they characterize terrorists as motivated by
pure 'evil'.  But they are not motivated by evil. However misguided we
may think them, they are motivated, like the Christian murderers of
abortion doctors, by what they perceive to be righteousness,
faithfully pursuing what their religion tells them. They are not
psychotic; they are religious idealists who, by their own lights, are
rational. They perceive their acts to be good, not because of some
warped personal idiosyncrasy, and not because they have been possessed
by Satan, but because they have been brought up, from the cradle, to
have total and unquestioning faith.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5264] Voltaire got it right long ago: 'Those who can make you
believe absurdities can make you commit atrocities.' So did Bertrand
Russell: 'Many people would sooner die than think. In fact they do.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5413] We should be aware of the remarkable power of the mind to
concoct false memories, especially when abetted by unscrupulous
therapists and mercenary lawyers. The psychologist Elizabeth Loftus
has shown great courage, in the face of spiteful vested interests, in
demonstrating how easy it is for people to concoct memories that are
entirely false but which seem, to the victim, every bit as real as
true memories.137 This is so counter-intuitive that juries are easily
swayed by sincere but false testimony from witnesses.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5420] Forty years on, it is harder to get redress for floggings than
for sexual fondlings, and there is no shortage of lawyers actively
soliciting custom from victims who might not otherwise have raked over
the distant past.  There's gold in them thar long-gone fumbles in the
vestry -- some of them, indeed, so long gone that the alleged offender
is likely to be dead and unable to present his side of the story. The
Catholic Church worldwide has paid out more than a billion dollars in
compensation.139 You might almost sympathize with them, until you
remember where their money came from in the first place.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5630] After a discussion of the Amish, and their right to bring up
'their own' children in 'their own' way, [Nicholas] Humphrey is
scathing about our enthusiasm as a society for maintaining cultural
diversity. All right, you may want to say, so it's tough on a child of
the Amish, or the Hasidim, or the gypsies to be shaped up by their
parents in the ways they are -- but at least the result is that these
fascinating cultural traditions continue. Would not our whole
civilization be impoverished if they were to go? It's a shame, maybe,
when individuals have to be sacrificed to maintain such diversity. But
there it is: it's the price we pay as a society. Except, I would feel
bound to remind you, we do not pay it, they do.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k5657] The majority of the Supreme Court drew a parallel with some of
the positive values of monastic orders, whose presence in our society
arguably enriches it. But, as Humphrey points out, there is a crucial
difference. Monks volunteer for the monastic life of their own free
will. Amish children never volunteered to be Amish; they were born
into it and they had no choice.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
There is something breathtakingly condescending, as well as inhumane,
about the sacrificing of anyone, especially children, on the altar of
'diversity' and the virtue of preserving a variety of religious
traditions. The rest of us are happy with our cars and computers, our
vaccines and antibiotics. But you quaint little people with your
bonnets and breeches, your horse buggies, your archaic dialect and
your earth-closet privies, you enrich our lives. Of course you must be
allowed to trap your children with you in your seventeenth-century
time warp, otherwise something irretrievable would be lost to us: a
part of the wonderful diversity of human culture. A small part of me
can see something in this. But the larger part is made to feel very
queasy indeed.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6055] Mark Twain's dismissal of the fear of death is another: 'I do
not fear death.  I had been dead for billions and billions of years
before I was born, and had not suffered the slightest inconvenience
from it.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6060] Robust intellects may be ready for the strong meat of Bertrand
Russell's declaration, in his 1925 essay 'What I Believe':
@/blockquote

@blockquote
I believe that when I die I shall rot, and nothing of my
ego will survive. I am not young and I love life. But I should scorn
to shiver with terror at the thought of annihilation. Happiness is
nonetheless true happiness because it must come to an end, nor do
thought and love lose their value because they are not
everlasting. Many a man has borne himself proudly on the scaffold;
surely the same pride should teach us to think truly about man's place
in the world. Even if the open windows of science at first make us
shiver after the cosy indoor warmth of traditional humanizing myths,
in the end the fresh air brings vigour, and the great spaces have a
splendour of their own.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6105] If your pet is dying in pain, you will be condemned for
cruelty if you do not summon the vet to give him a general anaesthetic
from which he will not come round. But if your doctor performs exactly
the same merciful service for you when you are dying in pain, he runs
the risk of being prosecuted for murder.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6111] But, it might be said, isn't there an important difference
between having your appendix removed and having your life removed? Not
really; not if you are about to die anyway. And not if you have a
sincere religious belief in life after death. If you have that belief,
dying is just a transition from one life to another. If the transition
is painful, you should no more wish to undergo it without anaesthetic
than you would wish to have your appendix removed without
anaesthetic. It is those of us who see death as terminal rather than
transitional who might naïvely be expected to resist euthanasia or
assisted suicide. Yet we are the ones who support it.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k7189] Purgatory is not to be confused with Limbo, where babies who
died un-baptized were supposed to go. And aborted foetuses?
Blastocysts? Now, with characteristically presumptuous aplomb, Pope
Benedict XVI has just abolished Limbo. Does that mean that all the
babies who have been languishing there all these centuries will now
suddenly float off to heaven? Or do they stay there and only the newly
dead escape Limbo? Or have earlier popes been wrong all along, in
spite of their infallibility? This is the kind of thing we are all
supposed to 'respect'.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6122] The doctrine of purgatory offers a preposterous revelation of
the way the theological mind works. Purgatory is a sort of divine
Ellis Island, a Hadean waiting room where dead souls go if their sins
aren't bad enough to send them to hell, but they still need a bit of
remedial checking out and purifying before they can be admitted to the
sin-free-zone of heaven.+ In medieval times, the Church used to sell
'indulgences' for money. This amounted to paying for some number of
days' remission from purgatory, and the Church literally (and with
breathtaking presumption) issued signed certificates specifying the
number of days off that had been purchased.  The Roman Catholic Church
is an institution for whose gains the phrase 'ill-gotten' might have
been specially invented.  And of all its money-making ripoffs, the
selling of indulgences must surely rank among the greatest con tricks
in history, the medieval equivalent of the Nigerian Internet scam but
far more successful.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6150] But what really fascinates me about the doctrine of purgatory
is the evidence that theologians have advanced for it: evidence so
spectacularly weak that it renders even more comical the airy
confidence with which it is asserted. The entry on purgatory in the
Catholic Encyclopedia has a section called 'proofs'. The essential
evidence for the existence of purgatory is this. If the dead simply
went to heaven or hell on the basis of their sins while on Earth,
there would be no point in praying for them. 'For why pray for the
dead, if there be no belief in the power of prayer to afford solace to
those who as yet are excluded from the sight of God.' And we do pray
for the dead, don't we?  Therefore purgatory must exist, otherwise our
prayers would be pointless! Q.E.D. This seriously is an example of
what passes for reasoning in the theological mind.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6173] For those of us lucky enough to be here, I pictured the
relative brevity of life by imagining a laser-thin spotlight creeping
along a gigantic ruler of time. Everything before or after the
spotlight is shrouded in the darkness of the dead past, or the
darkness of the unknown future. We are staggeringly lucky to find
ourselves in the spotlight. However brief our time in the sun, if we
waste a second of it, or complain that it is dull or barren or (like a
child) boring, couldn't this be seen as a callous insult to those
unborn trillions who will never even be offered life in the first
place?  As many atheists have said better than me, the knowledge that
we have only one life should make it all the more precious. The
atheist view is correspondingly life-affirming and life-enhancing,
while at the same time never being tainted with self-delusion, wishful
thinking, or the whingeing self-pity of those who feel that life owes
them something.  Emily Dickinson said, That it will never come again
Is what makes life so sweet.
@/blockquote

 Here's one of the more direct Popperisms by Dawkins.  Popper
believed that the more correct predictions a theory produces, the more
true it is (verisimilitude).

@blockquote
[k6238] Quantum mechanics, that rarefied pinnacle of twentieth-century
scientific achievement, makes brilliantly successful predictions about
the real world. Richard Feynman compared its precision to predicting a
distance as great as the width of North America to an accuracy of one
human hair's breadth. This predictive success seems to mean that
quantum theory has got to be true in some sense; as true as anything
we know, even including the most down-to-earth common-sense facts. Yet
the assumptions that quantum theory needs to make, in order to deliver
those predictions, are so mysterious that even the great Feynman
himself was moved to remark (there are various versions of this
quotation, of which the following seems to me the neatest): 'If you
think you understand quantum theory...you don't understand quantum
theory.'
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6280] 'Tell me,' the great twentieth-century philosopher Ludwig
Wittgenstein once asked a friend, 'why do people always say it was
natural for man to assume that the sun went round the Earth rather
than that the Earth was rotating?' His friend replied, 'Well,
obviously because it just looks as though the Sun is going round the
Earth.' Wittgenstein responded, 'Well, what would it have looked like
if it had looked as though the Earth was rotating?' I sometimes quote
this remark of Wittgenstein in lectures, expecting the audience to
laugh. Instead, they seem stunned into silence.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[k6346] Steve Grand points out that you and I are more like waves than
permanent 'things'. He invites his reader to think... of an
experience from your childhood.  Something you remember clearly,
something you can see, feel, maybe even smell, as if you were really
there. After all, you really were there at the time, weren't you? How
else would you remember it? But here is the bombshell: you weren't
there.  Not a single atom that is in your body today was there when
that event took place...Matter flows from place to place and
momentarily comes together to be you. Whatever you are, therefore, you
are not the stuff of which you are made. If that doesn't make the hair
stand up on the back of your neck, read it again until it does,
because it is important.
@/blockquote

@div.sig ^Via_Rob 10/30/2008
