@h1 BookReview: Crimes Against Logic (UK: Bad Thoughts)
@div.bib by Jamie Whyte, Corvo Books Ltd, 2004, 0-07-144643-5

Brilliant and hilarious book about the fallacies in rhetoric and
thinking.  The combination is stirring.   Whyte is from NZ and moved
to UK.  He works in finance.

@blockquote
[p78] If I were speaking instead of writing, I might register my
skepticism by saying "refutation" with a sneering tone or adopt the
now popular gesture of wagging the first two fingers of each hand
beside my ears like a demented rabbit.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
There is usually nothing confusing about this use of quotation
marks. It is an economical device for saying that the so-and-so
referred to by the word in quotation marks is only an alleged or a
so-called so-and-so. But some writers apply the device so
inconsistently or so excessively that it becomes impossible to know
what they mean.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Here is an example of inconsistency from Dr. Miriam Stoppard's
bestselling New Babycare Book. Chapter 2 includes a guide to the
reflexes you should expect from a healthy newborn baby. One is the
crawling reflex, whereby the baby is apt to pull her knees toward her
chest when placed on her belly. In the section's subheading this is
called the" crawling" reflex. The quotation marks, I assume, are
intended to indicate that the baby is not really crawling-the movement
merely resembles crawling. But, in the text, Dr. Stoppard states that
this "reflex" will disappear as soon as the baby's legs uncurl and she
lies flat. Which leaves one wondering whether the crawling reflex is
not really crawling or not really a reflex, or not really either-which
would make it a peculiar name for the behavior concerned.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p114] The desire to avoid ideological debate can lead to even worse
crimes than begging the question. Often the result is total
incoherence. Consider, for example, the current debate with Islamic
fundamentalism. Most Western politicians reject Islamic theocracy and
sharia law. They have their various grounds for disapproval: it is
insufficiently democratic, sharia law fails to protect women's rights,
and so on. These may be good objections, but they suffice for the
rejection of Islamic theocracy only if the basic religious beliefs of
Islamic fundamentalists are wrong. If Allah really does demand sharia
law, as the fundamentalists claim, then we should all adopt it as soon
as possible. Despotism and sexism are well worth it if they will save
us from the everlasting flames of hell.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p116] Even a name can beg the question. The Peace Movement of Cold
War days provides a nice example. The Peace Movement consisted of
those in favor of nuclear disarmament, even unilateral disarmament on
the part of the West. They thought this would promote peace and save
the world from nuclear Armageddon. Their opponents believed in nuclear
deterrence. They thought this would promote peace and save the world
from nuclear Armageddon. It is presumptuous, you will admit, for one'
side in this dispute to label itself the Peace Movement.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
It takes a terrible pedant to worry about such contentious built-in
assumptions, and pedantry has got itself a bad name. But don't let
that put you off. As Bertrand Russell said, a pedant is just someone
who prefers his opinions to be true.

@/blockquote

@div.sig ^Via_Rob 2005
