@h1 BookReview: Travels with Herodotus
@div.bib by Ryszard Kapuscinski, Knopf, June 5, 2007, 1400043387

Ryszard Kapuscinski was a Polish journalist.  He travelled the world
on the low budget, reporting to Poland and the Soviet Bloc on the
happenings in third world.  Unlike his Western peers, he sometimes did
not have enough money to file his reports via Telex let alone fly from
country to country. Yet he was a brilliant observer of the modern
world, and wrote many books.  This was the first book I read of his,
and no doubt will read more.

Travels with Herodotus is written in two times: Kapuscinski's and
Herodotus's.  Herodotus was a reporter of his time, the 5th century
B.C.  Herodotus wrote The Histories, a chronicle of the great events
of his time, including wars between the Greeks and Persians.
Herodotus was also an excellent observer of human nature, and as an
observer, not a judge, he simply reported what he heard, taking care
to document hearsay from "true" facts.

Kapuscinski writes about his first travels outside of Poland to India
and China, where he didn't speak the language, and had quite an
interesting time trying to gather news.  He didn't even know what that
meant, at first, I think.  He learned what it was to be an overseas
reporter on the job with the help of Herodotus, who, too, seemed to
have been on an on-the-job training program.

Kapuscinski studies The Histories, not for the history themselves --
although this is very interesting to me -- but to understand Herodotus
himself.  To understand extract his personality from this ancient
book.  I too found myself thinking about Kapuscinski.  How did he
survive so long in the Soviet Bloc with such an inquisitive mind?  Was
he deferential to authority, or was it that he was away so much of the
time, that he never had to face the uncomfortable situation caused by
too many questions?  He cares deeply about mankind, and how did that
play out on his conscience?  He seems passionate and passive,
inquisitive and unquestioning.  An enigma, but luckily for me, one I
can investigate more thoroughly by reading more of his books!

The book is simply great, and the translation is excellent.  It was
intimidated to approach, because the cover looks so academic.  I put
off reading it for several months before accepting its serious
challenge, which turned out to be more of a personal challenge than an
academic one.  Kapuscinski writes so easily (it seems to me), and
provides such profound reflections on humanity, that I was constantly
pondering about what he wrote and why he wrote it, while I read.

@blockquote
[p18] Left alone, I sat down on the bed and started to consider my
situation. On the negative side, I didn't know where I was. On the
positive. I had a roof over my head; an institution (a hote]) had
given me shelter. Did I feel safe? Yes. Uncomfortable? No. Strange!
Yes. I could not define precisely wherein lay this strangeness, but
the sensation grew stronger in the morning, when a barefoot man
entered the room bearing a pot of tea and several biscuits. Nothing
like this had ever happened to me before. He placed the tray on the
table, bowed, and. having uttered not a word, softly withdrew. There
was such a natural politeness in his manner, such profound
tactfulness, something so astonishingly delicate and dignified, that I
felt instant admiration and respect for him.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Something more disconcerting occurred an hour later, when I stepped
out of the hotel. On the opposite side of the street, on a cramped
little square. rickshaw drivers had been gathering since dawn-skinny,
stooped men with bony, sinewy legs. They must have learned that a
sahib had arrived in the hotel. A sahib, by definition, must have
money, so they waited patiently, ready to [p19] serve.  But the very
idea of sprawling comfortably in a rickshaw pulled by a hungry, weak
waif of a man with one foot already in the grave filled me with the
utmost revulsion, outrage, horror.  To be an exploiter? A bloodsucker?
To oppress the human being in this way?  Never!  I had been brought up
in precisely the opposite spirit, taught that even living skeletons
such as these were my brothers, kindred souls, near ones, flesh of my
flesh.  So when the rickshaw drivers threw themselves upon me with
pleading encouragement, clamoring and fighting amongst themselves for
my business, I began to push them away, rebuke them, protest.  They
were astounded -- what was I saying, what was I doing?  They had been
counting on me after all.  I was their only chance, their only hope --
if only for a bowl of rice.  I walked on without turning my head,
impassive, resolute, a little smugly proud of not having allowed
myself to be manipulated into assuming the role of leech.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p80] Anaximander of Miletus (a beautiful city in Asia Minor), who
predated Herodotus, created the first map of the world. According to
him, the earth is shaped like a cylinder. People live on its upper
surface. It is surrounded by the heavens and floats suspended in the
air, at an equal distance from all the heavenly bodies. Various other
maps come into being in that epoch. Most frequently, the earth is
represented as a flat, oval shield surrounded on all sides by the
waters of the great river Oceanus. Oceanus not only bounds all the
world, but also feeds all the earth's other rivers.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
The center of this world was the Aegean Sea, its shores and
islands. Herodotus organizes his expeditions from there. The further
he moves toward the ends of the earth, the more frequently he
encounters something new. He is the first to discover the world's
multicultural nature. The first to argue that each culture requires
acceptance and understanding, and that to understand it one must first
come to know it How do cultures differ from one another! Above all in
their customs. Tell me how you dress, how you act, what are your
habits, which gods you honor-and I will tell you who you are. Man not
only creates culture, inhabits it he carries it around within him-man
is culture.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p92] From the Persian capital of Susa to the shores of the Amu Darya
the road is long-or, more accurately, there is no road. One must cross
mountain passes, traverse the burning desert of Kara-Kum. and then
wander the endless steppes.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
One is reminded of Napoleon's mad campaign for Moscow. The Persian and
the Frenchman are in the grips of an identical pas· sion: to seize,
conquer, possess. Both will suffer defeat on account of having
transgressed a fundamental Greek principle, the law of moderation:
never to want too much, not to desire everything. But as they are
launching their ventures, they are too blind to see this; the lust for
conquest has dimmed their judgment. has deprived them of reason. On
the other hand, if reason ruled the world. would history even exist?  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p112] It is an imeresting subject superfluous people in the service
of brute power. A developed, stable, organized society is a
communitt=y of clearly delineated and defined roles. something that
cannot be said of the majority of Third World cities. Their
neighborhood are populated in large part by an unformed. fluid
element, lacking precise classification, without position, place, or
purpose. At any momemt and for whatever reason. these people. to whom
no one pays attention, whom no one needs, can form into a crowd,
throng, a mob, which has an opinion about everything, has time for
everything, and would like to participate in something, mean
something.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
All dictatorships take advantage of this idle magma.  They do even need
to maintain an expensive army of full-time policemen. [p113]
It suffices to reach out to these people searching for some
significance in life. Give them the sense that they can be of use,
that someone is counting on them for something, that they have been
noticed, that they have a purpose.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
The benefits of this relationship are mutual. The man of the street,
serving the dictatorship, starts to feel at one with the authorities,
to feel important and meaningful, and furthermore, because he usually
has some petty thefts, fights, and swindles on his conscience, he now
acquires the comforting sense of immunity. The dictatorial powers,
meantime, have in him an inexpensive-free, actually-yet zealous and
omnipresent agent-tentacle. Sometimes it is difficult even to call
this man an agent; he is merely someone who wants to be recognized,
who strives to be visible, seeking to remind the authorities of his
existence, who remains always eager to render a service.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p127] For the time being, the Babylonians are preparing an anti-
Persian uprising and a declaration of sovereignty. Their timing is
good. They know that the Persian court has just come through a long
period of anarchy, during which power had been held by the priestly
caste of the Magi. They were recently overthrown in a palace coup
staged by a group of Persian elites, who had only just selected from
among themselves a new king- Darius. Herodotus notes that the
Babylonians 
@span.rob
[Rob: I use double quotes (") in place of Kapuscinski's
italics for Herodotus's words]
@/span
 "were very well prepared". Clearly, he
writes, "they bad spent the whole troubled period of the Magus' rule
... getting ready for a siege, and somebow nobody had noticed that
they were doing so."
@/blockquote

@blockquote
The following passage now appears in Herodotus's text: "Once tbeir
rebellion was out in the open, this is wbat they did. The Babylonian
men gathered together all the women of the city -- with the exception
of their mothers and of a single woman chosen by each man from his own
housebold -- and strangled them.  The single woman was kept on as a
cook, while all the others were strangled to conserve supplies".
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p128] I do not know if Herodotus realized what he was writing. Did he
think about those words? Because at that time. in the sixth century,
Babylon had at least two to three hundred thousand inhabitants. It
follows, then, that tens of thousands of women were condemned to
strangulation -- wives, daughters, sisters. grandmothers, cousins,
lovers.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Our Greek says nothing more about this mass execution. Whose decision
was it? That of the Popular Assembly? Of the Municipal Government? Of
the Committee for the Defense of Babylon? Was there some discussion of
the matter? Did anyone protest? Who decided on the method of
execution -- that these women would be strangled? Were there other
suggestions? That they be pierced by spears, for example? Or cut down
with swords? Or burned on pyres? Or thrown into the Euphrates. which
coursed through the city?  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
There are more questions still. Could the women, who had been waiting
in their homes for the men to return from the meeting during which
sentence was pronounced upon them, discern something in their men's
faces? Indecision? Shame? Pain? Madness? The little girls of course
suspected nothing. But the older ones! Wouldn't instinct tell them
something? Did all the men observe the agreed silence? Didn't
conscience strike any of them? Did none of them experience an attack
of hysteria? Run screaming through the streets?
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p177] But during this period, I abandoned momentarily the fortunes of
the people and wars he wrote about and concentrated instead on his
technique. How did he work, i.e., what interested him, how did he
approach his sources, what did he ask them, what did they say in
reply! I was quite consciously trying to learn the art of reportage
and Herodotus struck me as a valuable teacher. I was intrigued by his
encounters, precisely because so much of what we write about derives
from our relation to other people -- I-he, I-they. That relation's
quality and temperature, as it were, have their direct bearing on the
final text. We depend on others; reportage is perhaps the form of
writing most reliant on the collective.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p178] The stuff of community was made up of two essential elements:
first, individuals, and second, that which they transmitted to one
another through immediate, personal contact.  Man, in order to exist
had to communicate, and in order to communicate, had to [p179] feel
beside him the presence of another, had to see him and hear him -- there
was no other form of communication, and so no other way of life. The
culture of oral transmission drew them closer: one knew one's fellow
not only as one who would help them gather food and defend against the
enemy, but also as someone unique and irreplaceable, one who could
interpret the world and guide his fellows through it.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
And how much richer is this primeval. antique language of direct
contact and Socratic give-and-take! Because it is not only words that
matter in it.  What is important, and frequently paramount is what is
communicated wordlessly, by facial expression, hand gesture, body
movement.  Herodotus understands this, and like every reporter or
ethnologist he tries to be in the most direct contact with his
interlocutors, not only listening to what they say, but also watching
how they say it, how they act as they speak.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
His task is complex: on the one hand, he knows that the most precious
and almost the only source of knowledge is the memory of those he
meets: on the other hand, he is aware that this memory is a fragile
thing, volatile and evanescent-that memory has a vanishing point. That
is why he is in a hurry -- people forget, or else move away somewhere and
one cannot find them again, and eventually they die. And Herodotus is
out to collect as many reasonably credible facts as possible.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p184] The driver with whom I traveled about most frequently in
Ethiopia-which I had reached by a somewhat circuitous route, through
Uganda. Tanzania. and Kenya -- was called Negusi. He was a slight,
thin man, on whose skinny neck swollen with veins rested a
disproportionately large yet shapely head. His eyes were remarkable --
enormous. dark, obscured by a shiny film, like the eyes of a dreamy
girl. Negusi was compulsively neat at each stop he carefully removed
the dust from his clothes with a little brush, which he always carried
with him. This was not wholly unjustified in this country, where in
the dry season, there was no place free of dust and sand.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
My travels with Negusi -- and we drove thousands of kilometers
together under difficult and hazardous conditions -- were yet another
lesson in what an abundance of signs and signals any human being
is. All one has to do is make an effort to notice and interpret
them. Predisposed to thinking that another person communicates with us
solely by means of the spoken or written word, we do not stop to
consider that there are many other methods of conversation. Everything
speaks: the expression of the face and eyes, the gestures of the hand
and the movements of the body, the vibrations which the latter sends
out, his clothing and the way it is [p185] worn; dozens of other
transmitters, amplifiers, and mufflers, which together make up the
individual being and -- to use the conceit of the Anglophone world --
his personal chemistry.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Technology, which reduces human exchange to an electronic signal,
impoverishes and mutes this multifarious nonverbal language with
which, when we are together, in close proximity, we continually and
unconsciously communicate. This unspoken language, moreover, the
language of facial expression and minute gesture, is infinitely more
sincere and genuine than the spoken or written one; it is far more
difficult to tell lies without words, to conceal falsehood and
hypocrisy. So that a man could truly camouflage his thoughts, the
disclosure of which could prove dangerous, Chinese culture perfected
the art of the frozen face, of the inscrutable mask and the vacant
gaze: only behind such a screen could someone truly hide.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Negusi knew only two expressions in English: "problem" and "no
problem."  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
But using this gibberish we communicated ably in the most fraught
circumstances. In conjunction with the wordless signals particular to
each human being and which can speak volumes if only we would observe
him carefully -- drink him in, as it were!wo words sufficed for us to
feel no chasm between us and made traveling together possible.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p187] Every expedition into the depths of Ethiopia is a
luxury. Ordinarily, my days are spent gathering information, writing
telegrams, and going to the post office, so the telegrapher on duty
can forward my dispatches to the Polish Press Agency offices in London
(this turns out to be less costly than sending them directly to
Warsaw). The collecting of information is a time-eonsuming, difficult
and dodgy business-a hunting expedition that rarely results in
capturing one's quarry. Only one newspaper is published here: four
pages called the Ethiopian Herald. (I witnessed several times in the
countryside a bus arriving from Addis Ababa, bringing not only
passengers but a single copy of this publication as well. People
gathered in the marketplace and the mayor or a local teacher read
aloud the articles in Amharic and summarized those written in
English. Everyone listened raptly and the atmosphere was almost
festive: a newspaper had arrived from the capital!)
@/blockquote

@blockquote
An emperor rules Ethiopia at this time: there are no political
parties, trade unions, or parliamentary opposition. There are Eritrean
guerrillas, but far away in the north, in mostly impenetrable
mountains. A Somali opposition movement operates out in a region of
equally difficult access, the desert of the Ogaden. Yes. I tould
somehow make my way to both places, but it would take months, and I am
Poland's only correspondent in all of Africa. I cannot just suddenly
go silent disappear into the continent's uninhabited wastelands.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p188] So how am I to gather my material? My colleagues from the
wealthy news agencies-Reuters, AP, or AFP -- hire translators, but I
lack the funds for this. Furthermore, their offices art equipped with
a powerful radio: an American Zenith, a Trans-Oceanic, from which one
can tune in the entire world. But it costs a fortune, and I can only
fantasize about it.   So I walk, ask, listen, cajole, scrape, and string
together facts, opinions, stories. I don't complain, because this
method enables me to meet many people and find out about things not
covered in the press or on the radio.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
When there's a lull, I make arrangements with Negusi to go out into
the field. One cannot venture too far, because out there in the
vastness it is easy to get stuck for days on end, weeks even. I have
in mind a distance of one hundred or two hundred kilometers. before
the great mountains begin. Furthermore, Christmas is approaching, and
all of Africa, even the Muslim part is growing noticeably quieter, to
say nothing of Ethiopia, which has been Christian for sixteen
centuries. "Go to Arba Minch'" advise those in the know, and they say
it with such conviction that the name begins to acquire a magical
resonance for me.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p206] The Persians face no dilemmas-their single goal is to please
their king. They are like Russian soldiers from the poem "Ordon's
Redoubt" by Adam Mickiewicz.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
@pre
How the soldiers fall, whose God and faith
@/blockquote

@blockquote
is the Czar. 
@/blockquote

@blockquote
The Czar is angry: let us die, and make the
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Czar happy. 
@/pre
@/blockquote

@blockquote
The Greeks by contrast are by nature divided. On the one hand, they
are attached to their small homelands, their city-states, each with
its distinct interests and separate ambitions; on the other hand, they
are united by a common language and common gods, as well as by a vague
feeling -- which nevertheless resonates forcefully at times -- of a
greater Greek patriotism.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p217] I have the impression that Herodotus's problem was altogether
different: He decides, probably towards the end of his life, to write
a book because he realizes that he has amassed such an enormous [p218]
trove of stories and facts that unless he preserves them. they will
simply vanish. His book is yet another expression of man's struggle
against time. against the fragility of memory. its ephemerality. its
perpetual tendency to erase itself and disappear. The concept of the
book, any book, arose from just this battle. The written word has a
durability, one would even like to say "eternality".  Man knows, and
in the course of years he comes to know it increasingly well, feeling
it ever more acutely, that memory is weak and fleeting, and if he
doesn't write down what he has learned and experienced. that which he
carries within him will perish when he does. This is why it seems
everyone wants to write a book. Singers and football players,
politicians and millionaires.  And if they themselves do not know
how, or else lack the time, they commission someone else to do it for
them. That is how it is and always will be. Engendering this reality
is the impression of writing as an easy and simple pursuit, though
those who subscribe to that view might do well to ponder Thomas Mann's
observation that "a writer is a man for whom writing is more difficult
than it is for others."  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Herodotus is abundantly aware of this complication, yet he perseveres
-- he keeps conducting his investigations, citing various opinions
about an incident or else rejecting them all outright as being absurd
and contrary to common sense. He won't be a passive listener and
chronicler, but wants to participate actively in the creation of this
marvelous drama that is history -- of today, yesterday, and times more
distant still.  
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p262] In any event it was not only the accounts of witnesses to what
once was that influenced and helped create the image of the world that
he bequeathed to us. His contemporaries also had a hand in it. In
those days before the advent of publishing and the solitary author, a
writer lived in close, immediate contact with his audience. There were
no books, after all, so he simply presented to the public what he had
written and they would listen, reacting and [p263] commenting on the
spot.  Their responses would have likely been an important indicator
for him of whether he was going in an apt direction, whether his
manner of telling was favorable.

@/blockquote

@div.sig ^Via_Rob 2/17/2008
