@h1 BookReview: The Logic of Scientific Discovery
@div.bib by Karl Popper, Routledge, March 29, 2002, 978-0415278447

This book introduces Karl Popper's theory of how science advances.
Published in the original German in 1934, with the English edition
arriving in 1958.  Popper's writing style is probably the most clear
and interesting of any philosopher I have read.  I understand his
books almost completely -- except his mathematical proofs, which are
beyond me no matter who writes them.  The book is thick (544 pages),
but I read it through.  While the concepts are extremely simple, the
argumentation is quite intense.

The detail was overwhelming at times.  It's not a casual philosphy
book.

Popper is a philosopher of grand theories.  At the start of the
preface, he claims that "all science is cosmology".  I can relate,
because I think it is all software, or as John Wheeler says, "it's a
bit".  While I do not pretend to understand the first thing about the
cosmology of the Universe, I do think there's a cosmology of Software
(*all* software).  Therefore, I think there are many lessons to be
learned from Popper.  What disappoints me is that my computer science
curriculum did not include a discussion of Popper's Logic of
Scientific Discovery.  I guess I would have been to young and
impatient to understand such a course, anyway.

@blockquote
[p10] It should be noticed that a positive decision can only
temporarily support the theory, for subsequent negative decisions may
always overthrow it. So long as theory withstands detailed and severe
tests and is not superseded by another theory in the course of
scientific progress, we may say that it has 'proved its mettle' orrhat
it is 'corroborated' by past experience.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Nothing resembling inductive logic appears in the procedure here
outlined. I never assume that we can argue from the truth of singular
statements to the truth of theories. I never assume that by force of
'verified' conclusions, theories can be established as 'true', or even
as merely 'probable'.
@/blockquote

 The problem with any epistemology is that it cannot prove itself.
Some people think that Popper claims that his proposals are provable,
and he argues with such forcefulness that he seems certain they are
true, and may have even fooled himself into their being true.
However, I think that's true of many of the philosopher's of science,
and this doesn't mean his theory is not useful on its own.  Popper was
a lightning rod for criticism, and I think unfairly so.  He was so
certain, I think, that it was easy to mock him with relativistic
arguments ("we never know anything for certain"), which might also be
true, but did not devalue his theories themselves as well as their
usefulness as an approach to scientific discovery.

@blockquote
[p15] Thus I freely admit that in arriving at my proposals I have been
guided, in the last analysis, by value judgments and
predilections. But I hope that my proposals may be acceptable to those
who value not only logical rigour but also freedom from dogmatism; who
seek practical applicability, but are even more attracted by the
adventure of science, and by discoveries which again and again
confront us with new and unexpected questions, challenging us to
tryout new and hitherto undreamed-of answers.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p37] The empirical sciences are systems of theories. The logic of
scientific knowledge can therefore be described as a theory of
theories.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Scientific theories are universal statements. Like all linguistic
representations they are systems of signs or symbols. Thus I do not
think it helpful to express the difference between universal theories
and singular statements by saying that the latter are 'concrete'
whereas theories are merely symbolic formulae or symbolic schemata;
for exactly the same may be said of even the most 'concrete'
statements.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Theories are nets cast to catch what we call 'the world': to [p38]
rationalize, to explain, and to master it. We endeavour to make the
mesh ever finer and finer.
@/blockquote

 Testable software is better, because we can define how it will
behave.  That doesn't mean we have written all the possible tests for
the program.  Rather, we *can* write tests, and the more we write, the
more reliable the software will be.  If we can't even think of how to
test software, how would we know if it begins to satisify our
customer's requirements.

@blockquote
[p128] Above all, our theory explains why simplicity is so highly
desirable.  To understand this there is no need for us to assume a
'principle of economy of thought' or anything of the kind. Simple
statements, if knowledge is our object, are to be prized more highly
than less simple ones because they tell us more; because their
empirical content is greater; and because they are better testable.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p280] The old scientific ideal of episteme--of absolutely certain,
demonstrable knowledge-has proved to be an idol. The demand for
scientific objectivity makes it inevitable that every scientific
statement must remain tentative for ever. It may indeed be
corroborated, but every corroboration is relative to other statements
which, again, are tenative. Only in our subjective experiences of
conviction, in our subjective faith, can we be 'absolutely certain'.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p281] With the idol of certainty (including that of degrees of
imperfect certainty or probability) there falls one of the defences of
obscurantism which bar the way of scientific advance. For the worship
of this idol hampers not only the boldness of our questions, but also
the rigour and the integrity of our tests. The wrong view of science
betrays itself in the craving to be right; for it is not his
possession of knowledge, of irrefutable truth, that makes the man of
science, but his persistent and recklessly critical quest for truth.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
Has our attitude, then, to be one of resignation? Have we to say that
science can fulfil only its biological task; that it can, at best,
merely prove its mettle in practical applications which may
corroborate it? Are its intellectual problems insoluble? I do not
think so. Science never pursues the illusory aim of making its answers
final, or even probable. Its advance is, rather, towards an infinite
yet attainable aim: that of ever discovering new, deeper, and more
general problems, and of subjecting our ever tentative answers to ever
renewed and ever more rigorous tests.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
[p282] (4) The pragmatic problem of induction solves itself: the
practical preference for the theory which in the light of the rational
discussion appears to be nearer to the truth is risky but rational.
@/blockquote

@blockquote
(5) The psychological problem (why do we believe that the theory so
chosen will continue to be worthy of our trust?) is, I suggest,
trivial: a belief or trust is always irrational, but it may be
important for action.
@/blockquote

@div.sig ^Via_Rob 10/31/2008
